JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally, 2016 is
finally upon us. And it's an
election year.And we already
have a little news in the
presidential race, some
eye-popping fund-raising totals.
Hillary Clinton's campaign
reports a new record for a
non-incumbent, raising $37
million for her primary bid in
the past three months alone.
Republican Ben Carson raised $23
million. And Ted Cruz has raised
about $20 million. He has not
released his official report
yet.To talk about the
election, to look ahead to what
is in store in 2016, we have the
analysis of Shields and Gerson.
That's syndicated columnist Mark
Shields and Washington Post
columnist Michael Gerson. David
Brooks is away. nd we welcome
you both. Happy new year.
ICHAEL GERSON: Happy new year.
ARK SHIELDS: Happy new year.
UDY WOODRUFF: 2016 is finally
here. o, Mark, a lot of money
being raised, but I want to turn
to something. We have spent a
lot of time this year talking
about Donald Trump. Let's talk
about some of the so-called
mainstream Republicans who are
trying to break through,
frankly, to knock him off of his
perch.Jeb Bush has been
trying. He's had a tough week.
They have redirected resources
and staff. Where -- do you see a
way forward for Jeb Bush? ARK
SHIELDS: Jeb Bush's only way
forward -- every four years,
Judy, everybody who runs for
president is an amateur at
running for president. It is so
unlike anything else, 50
different campaigns in 50
different states, all those
demands.But the iron rule of
politics prevails. And that is,
nobody has ever been elected
president of the United States
in the modern era who didn't win
the New Hampshire primary, at
the very worst finish second, as
George W. Bush did in 2000 to
John McCain, and as Barack Obama
did.But everybody else has
been a winner. And so, all of a
sudden, you realize all the
national headquarters I have,
national support doesn't mean
anything if I can't come out of
New Hampshire as one of the two,
or maybe at the very worst
third. And, right now, it looks
like, you know, Donald Trump has
the lead. So they're fighting.
eb Bush has directed all his
resources. It only took 97,000
votes to win New Hampshire in
2012. So, you say to yourself, I
have won Florida. John Kasich, I
have won Ohio. Chris Christie, I
have won New Jersey.And so,
all of a sudden, you're saying,
I can go in with effort, energy
and time. I can persuade enough
voters to my side, and I have to
do it if I'm going to survive.
UDY WOODRUFF: And so that is
what he has got to do.MARK
SHIELDS: That's right.JUDY
WOODRUFF: Michael, Iowa one
month away. We're exactly one
month away now from the Iowa
caucuses, and just a week later,
it's New Hampshire. What about
Jeb Bush? ICHAEL GERSON:
That's true. All of those
candidates you're talking about
take comfort in the fact that 70
percent, according to the
historical examples, of New
Hampshire voters make their
determination in the last 30
days of the race. It breaks
late. he problem for
Republicans here is that they
have four pretty strong
candidates in that establishment
or mainstream Republican space.
Donald Trump has the blue-collar
populists. Ted Cruz is really
solidifying religious voters,
some Tea Party voters.But this
mainstream lane has those four
candidates we have been talking
about, and all of them are good.
You watch C-SPAN and see Chris
Christie, who has been there 40
times. He's on his game. He's
doing really well.The Bush
campaign has gone through the
stages of grief, OK? They had a
message problem, and they had
performance problems. And
they're doing better. You're
watching them in town hall
meetings. His message is very
sharp. And he's making the most
principled criticism of Donald
Trump in this field and wants to
collect those voters. o it's a
real showdown between talented
candidates in this case.JUDY
WOODRUFF: Right.Does one or
another of them, Mark, have an
advantage in some way, as you
see it? ARK SHIELDS: I think
Christie is the best candidate.
He's the best natural candidate.
UDY WOODRUFF: As a campaigner.
ARK SHIELDS: As a campaigner,
he's the best.But what all of
them face, Judy, is -- at this
point is that they're starting
to get -- as they pop their head
up, whether it's Marco Rubio and
his absenteeism from the Senate,
or it's Chris Christie and it's
nine times the credit rating of
New Jersey has been lowered, or
if it's John Kasich, and the
Bush people are now -- or the
Bush PAC, at least, is raising
the fact that, in 1994, John
Kasich in the House, as a House
member, voted for the assault
weapons ban, and that this is
now a disqualification, with all
that has happened in this
country.But you start to see,
they realize that only one of
them probably can really survive
New Hampshire and Iowa. And so
the sniping at each other is
going on. I would say Bush is
just the anomaly. I mean, Bush
had the best record going in. He
was -- he had the best peer
review. He had a record as a
conservative in a reasonably
conservative party, a swing
state, a Latino wife. He spoke
Spanish.You know, on paper --
but he just hasn't connected,
basically. And he's now down to
he's got to win Peterborough,
he's got to win Keene.
CROSSTALK)MICHAEL GERSON:
Right. And he has the best
ground game of any of the
candidates. He's got money in
the bank. ou know, Chris
Christie, if he wins, he's
running a single-state campaign.
There are real questions of
whether he could follow that up
in the decisive races in March.
ARK SHIELDS: Yes. I agree. I
agree.MICHAEL GERSON: Someone
like Bush could do that, or
Rubio. They're building national
campaigns. They are capable of
doing that. So, they're
distinguishing themselves in
various ways. And the choice
will be fascinating.MARK
SHIELDS: I will just say that I
think Bush acknowledges that
he's not running a national
campaign now. He knows... UDY
WOODRUFF: By saying he's putting
staff and money...(CROSSTALK)
ARK SHIELDS: By putting all
the resources -- by taking the
television money out of Iowa.
He's basically saying, New
Hampshire is big casino for him.
think what it proves to me,
anyway, is that Chris Christie
would have been Barack Obama's
strongest opponent in 2012.
UDY WOODRUFF: Well, we will
see what... ARK SHIELDS: I
mean, he was really -- he's just
a gifted campaigner.JUDY
WOODRUFF: I want to ask you both
about somebody else on the
Republican side who's having --
who has had an even more
difficult time this week,
Michael, and that's Ben Carson.
e's now had five staffers, two
very senior people leave the
campaign. Where does he stand?
ICHAEL GERSON: Well, this is
the problem of campaigning as a
candidate with no experience.
You have no experience.
LAUGHTER) ICHAEL GERSON: I
mean, he has not run a good
campaign. It's imploding. He had
broad resignations on people,
because he had two power centers
in the campaign that were
obviously being played off
against one another.And all
this redounds to the benefit of
Ted Cruz, particularly in Iowa,
who is, I think, picking up a
lot of that ground that Carson
is conceding. UDY WOODRUFF:
And it's a reminder that money
may not make the difference. As
we just said, he raised $23
million in the last quarter.
ARK SHIELDS: But they spent a
lot of money to raise the money,
Judy. he key number in all of
those figures is cash on hand,
how much they have -- how much
they have spent to raise it. And
Ben Carson, it comes back, that
campaign has become a civil war
in a leper colony.(LAUGHTER)
ARK SHIELDS: He has basically
acknowledged all of it. UDY
WOODRUFF: Oops. ARK SHIELDS:
And the recriminations back and
forth.And the old saw,
bromide, whether it's or not, if
you can't run a campaign, how
can you run the country? And I
think that is coming to...
ICHAEL GERSON: Some truth to
it, yes.JUDY WOODRUFF: 2015,
ask both of you.Michael, I
will start with you. What were
the moments that are going to
make a difference, do you think,
as we look to this campaign
going forward?MICHAEL GERSON:
Well, the event is the obvious
one, which is, Donald Trump has
found a new way to run a
presidential campaign.I have
been part of three of them. You
put out policy papers. You give
speeches. You get endorsements.
You raise money. He has tweeted
his way to dominance in this new
media environment. It is a new
way to conduct a campaign, the
reality television version. I
think that it's many times
vulgar and shallow, but it has
an audience, and that's clearly
true. nd the moment, though,
that I think is the most
important is the leading
Republican candidate referring
to the Japanese internment, this
historical example, in December
as a positive example in the
context of the war on terror.
ARK SHIELDS: Yes. ICHAEL
GERSON: It is the -- for me,
personally, that was a really
terrible moment in modern
Republican history. And, you
know, I think it's going to have
consequences going forward.
UDY WOODRUFF: What about for
you, Mark, moments in 2015?
ARK SHIELDS: I would say the
Trump phenomenon. irst of all,
I have to say that Bernie
Sanders -- the idea that Bernie
Sanders could emerge to the
point where he is, with 2.5
million contributors, with, you
know, actually having changed
the terms of the debate for the
Democratic nomination, the
dialogue, I think, is a real
surprise. ut, to me, the Trump
-- the Trump model, where the
unscripted sort of off-the-cuff,
no teleprompter, speaking, and
making, Judy, what could at best
be called reckless statements,
at worst be called divisive, but
have to be called untruths,
whether it's, I saw thousands of
people in Jersey City on the day
of September 11 dancing in the
streets at the prospect or the
reality of the... UDY
WOODRUFF: Nine-eleven.MARK
SHIELDS: ... World Trade Center
falling.But each of them is
reckless in its own way. When he
said that 81 percent of whites
who are murdered in this country
are murdered by black Americans,
when, in fact, it's the
opposite, I mean, the reality is
that 80 -- 16 percent of whites
are killed by black Americans
and 82 percent of whites are
killed by whites. ut -- and
then, when called on this, he
pays no price. That's -- I guess
that's -- if it's our fault, if
it's the voters who are just fed
up, I don't know. UDY
WOODRUFF: Is that something,
though, that endures into this
next year? Do you see that
phenomenon of being able to say
what he wants to say and having
it stand lasting and having an
effect? ICHAEL GERSON: I think
it's raising a very fundamental
issue in American politics,
which is, what is the meaning of
authenticity? s it this kind
of, you know, offhand comment
that Donald Trump engages in, or
is it crafted rhetoric? Is it
careful policy? Is it
seriousness? And right now, we
have a model, a presidential
model of authenticity that means
thoughtlessness. And I think
that that's going to have to be
retaken in the Republican Party.
UDY WOODRUFF: You know,
Michael, you mentioned
immigration, or at least what --
part of what Trump said, but
what -- Mark, what issues do you
see shaping this next -- these
-- this next phase, the
election, and leading up to
November? ARK SHIELDS: Well, I
think there's two that really
work against the Democrats,
basically, a third White House
term. he first is the
revelation in surveys, in Wall
Street Journal/NBC poll in
particular, that 73 percent of
people want to change policies
from President Obama. So, every
election is either change or
continuity. We're going to
continue or we're going to go in
a different direction.
CROSSTALK)JUDY WOODRUFF: ...
50 percent, but 73 percent...
CROSSTALK)MARK SHIELDS:
Seventy-three percent want to
change the policies.That's
exactly the same number, Judy,
as it was in the summer of 2007,
when President Bush was in his
seventh year, which, remember,
2008 was very much of a change
year. And I would say the other
one is the Paris and San
Bernardino, when the emphasis
and the focus switched in
America, which hurt Ben Carson,
obviously, but switched to
terrorism and sort of a fear and
war on terror.And I think that
helps Republicans have -- who,
over the past generation, are
seen as better than the
Democrats on national security.
Whether they should be or not,
they are. UDY WOODRUFF: What
issues do you see?MICHAEL
GERSON: I will tell you one
hopeful issue for 2016. ith
the right lineup, with, say,
President Rubio and Speaker
Ryan, both of them have tried,
from the Republican side, to
engage the issue of poverty.
Paul Ryan has traveled the
country looking at examples of
community-based efforts. Rubio
has put out serious policy on
EITC and other things.I'm
hoping that, under certain
circumstances -- it would be
different from Cruz, for
example, or Trump -- but under
certain circumstances, you do
have the groundwork laid for a
debate about social mobility in
this country that I think could
be very productive and is
necessary.JUDY WOODRUFF: And
on that hopeful note, we will
end it and once again say happy
new year to you both, 2016.
ARK SHIELDS: OK. Happy new
year. ICHAEL GERSON: Happy new
year. UDY WOODRUFF: Michael
Gerson, Mark Shields, thank you.
ARK SHIELDS: Judy Woodruff,
happy new year. LAUGHTER)
UDY WOODRUFF: Thank you.